Cannabis and mental healthMore older people in US using marijuana
About this leaflet

This leaflet looks at the research on the effects of cannabis use and mental health and is for anyone who is concerned about the issue. We hope that this will help people to make informed choices about using - or not using - cannabis.
Introduction

Cannabis is the most widely used substance in the UK. Even though there has been a steady reduction of use since 1996, about 2,3 million 16-59 year-olds have reported using cannabis in the past year. Frequent use of cannabis is about twice as likely amongst young people, and nearly 5,3 million 16-24 year-olds have used it in the last year.

In spite of government and media warnings about health risks, many people see cannabis as a harmless substance that helps you to relax and 'chill' - a drug that, unlike alcohol and cigarettes, might even be good for your physical and mental health.

On the other hand, research over the last 10 years has suggested that it can have serious consequences for people, such as the development of an enduring psychotic illness, particularly in those who are genetically vulnerable.
What is cannabis?

Cannabis sativa and cannabis indica are members of the nettle family that have grown wild throughout the world for centuries. Both plants have been used for a variety of purposes including hemp to make rope and textiles, as a medical herb and as the popular recreational drug.

 

The plant is used as:

    The resin – a brown/black lump, known as  bhang, ganja, hashish, resin etc;
    Herbal cannabis –  made up of the dried flowering tops and variable amounts of dried leaves - known as grass, marijuana, spliff, weed etc.

Skunk refers to a range of stronger types of cannabis, grown for their higher concentration of the main active ingredient, namely THC (tetrahydrocannabinol). The name refers to the pungent smell they give off while growing. They can be grown either under grow-lights or in a greenhouse, often using hydroponic (growing in nutrient rich liquids rather than soil) techniques. There are hundreds of other varieties of cannabis with exotic names such as AK-47, Knock Out or Destroyer.

 

Over the last 15 years, skunk has invaded the street market and its THC content is about 2-3 times higher than the 'traditional' cannabis used in earlier years. In the UK, most sold materials is home grown because of a loop hole in the law making it legal to buy seeds over the internet.